# mymysqlnd_ms
This is a fork of the mysqlnd replication and load balancing plugin pecl extension (mysqlnd_ms http://php.net/manual/en/book.mysqlnd-ms.php). 

# MAJOR CHANGES
Most changes are in global transaction GTID injection implementation (see: http://php.net/manual/en/mysqlnd-ms.quickstart.gtid.php) and session consistency implementation of the Quality Of Service filter (see: http://php.net/manual/en/mysqlnd-ms.qos-consistency.php).

* PHP7.x porting
* New QOS session consinstency and transaction id injection
* Server side read consistency \(mysql >= 5.7.6 with --session-track-gtids=OWN_GTID\)
  * Mysql native built-in read consistency 
  * PHP session_id read consistency enforcing
* Client side write consistency \(mysql >= 5.7.6 with --session-track-gtids=OWN_GTID\)
  * Multi master write consistency 
  * Multi master write consistency logical partitions
* Client side read consistency
  * Distinct master connection for client side read consistency and gtid injection
  * Client side transaction id injection with memcached mysql plugin
* New config\_dir ini directive for connection based json config files 
* New master\_on ini directive for rw splitting 
* New inject\_on ini directive for transcation id consistency tracking/injection
* New mysqlnd\_ms\_set\_trx\(\) and mysqlnd\_ms\_unset\_trx\(\) php functions for application based transaction tracking

Any suggestions or comments are very welcome.

>
** DOCUMENTATION IS NOT READY, I AM WORKING ON IT - FOR CONSISTENCY SEE [SERVICE LEVEL AND CONSISTENCY](docs/BOOK/QUICKSTART-AND-EXAMPLES/SERVICE-LEVEL-AND-CONSISTENCY.md) **

## PHP7.x porting
The mymysqlnd_ms extension has been tested on PHP5.x \(5.5, 5.6\) and PHP7.x \(7.0, 7.1, 7.2\) with no ZTS and ONLY ON LINUX \(centos 6 but i hope it works on any linux distribution\). Requires libxm2 and libmemcached. 

## NEW QOS SESSION CONSISTENCY AND TRANSACTION ID INJECTION
Transaction id injection functionality have been deeply changed in behaviour and configurations directives and it should be used together with QOS filter and session consistency enabled.
As stated 
### New placeholders for global\_transaction\_id\_injection section
In `on_commit`, `fetch_last_gtid`, `check_for_gtid`, `memcached_key`, `memcached_wkey` configuration directives new placeholders can be used:
* `#SID`: Placeholder for the php session\_id value. This is particularly usefull together with the `on_connect` directive  when read consistency through distinct http requests is needed. In the following configuration example the  `"memcached_key": "#SID"` directive instructs the plugin to store the last effective GTID value, generated by the user with session\_id `XXXXXX`, in the memcached key `mymyXXXXXX`. The `"on_connect": 1`, instructs the plugin to read from that memcached key and set it as initial connection value for read consistency enforcing.

```
{
    "myapp": {
        "master": {
            "master_0": {
                "host": "mymaster",
             }
        },
        "slave": {
            "slave_0": {
                "host": "myslave0",
            },
            "slave_1": {
                "host": "myslave1",
            }
        },
        "trx_stickiness": "master",
        "global_transaction_id_injection": {
            "type": 2,
            "on_connect": 1,
            "fetch_last_gtid": "SELECT @@GLOBAL.GTID_EXECUTED AS trx_id FROM DUAL",
            "memcached_host": "mymemcached",
            "memcached_key": "mymy#SID",
            "report_error": true
        },
        "filters": {
            "quality_of_service": {
                "session_consistency": 1
            },
            "random": {
                "sticky": "1"
            }
        },
        "server_charset": "utf8",
        "failover": {
             "strategy": "loop_before_master",
             "remember_failed": true,
             "max_retries": 1
        }
    }
}
```

* `#USER`: Placeholder for the MySQL user. Can be usefull in multi-master write consistency. 
* `#DB`: Placeholder for the MySQL database name. Can be usefull in multi-master write consistency. 


### New configuration directives
* `"type"`: In the global\_transaction\_id\_injection section the `type` configuration directive is mandatory. Value must be an integer between 1-3:
  * Value `1`: Is for [Client side read consistency](README.md#client-side-read-consistency), basically is the old legacy transaction id injection behaviour \(see also the mysqlnd\_ms original documentation [Global transaction IDs](http://php.net/manual/en/mysqlnd-ms.quickstart.gtid.php)\).
  * Value `2`: Is for [Server side read consistency](README.md#server-side-read-consistency).
  * Value `3`: Is for [Server side read consistency](README.md#server-side-read-consistency) with [Client side write consistency](README.md#client-side-write-consistency).


## CONSISTENCY



### Distinct master connection for client side transaction id injection:
If the "on_commit" directive is set then transaction injection feature use a distinct dedicated connection to set the transaction ID on the master. Consequentially the transaction injection can now be done after the effective original master query without any results interaction. 
In original source code, to avoid troubles with results, injection was done before the effective write query and a slave will be selected, by qos session consistency filter, also if still does not propagate the corresponding query. 
The mysqlnd_ms_get_last_gtid php function will now use the distinct master connection instead of the last used connection.

### Use of memcached mysql plugin: 
You can use a MySQL memcached plugin managed db table as transaction id repository.
The new "memcached_key" directive can be used as a replacement of "on_commit", "fetch_last_gtid" and  "check_for_gtid" SQL query directives. 
To use this feature login to the master, install the MySQL memcached plugin and set the innodb_api_enable_binlog option. Create the transaction id table ... something like:

```
CREATE DATABASE mygtid;
USE mygtid;
CREATE TABLE `memcached` (
  `id` char(32) NOT NULL DEFAULT '',
  `trx_id` varchar(30) NOT NULL,
  `flags` int(11) NOT NULL,
  `cas` bigint(20) NOT NULL,
  `expiry` int(11) NOT NULL,
  PRIMARY KEY (`id`)
) ENGINE=InnoDB DEFAULT CHARSET=utf8;
```
Add the new transaction id table to innodb_memcache.containers: 

```
INSERT INTO `innodb_memcache`.`containers` (`name`, `db_schema`, `db_table`, `key_columns`, `value_columns`, `flags`, `cas_column`,
`expire_time_column`,`unique_idx_name_on_key`) VALUES ('default', 'mygtid', 'memcached', 'id', 'trx_id', 'flags','cas','expiry','PRIMARY');
```
Reload the memcached mysql plugin daemon:

```
UNINSTALL PLUGIN daemon_memcached;
INSTALL PLUGIN daemon_memcached soname "libmemcached.so";
```
On all slaves install the MySQL memcached plugin, if slaves can be promoted to master and have binary log enabled set also the innodb_api_enable_binlog option. 

In mysqlnd_ms json configuration file replace the "on_commit", "fetch_last_gtid" and  "check_for_gtid" directives with new "memcached_key" directive...something like:

        ........
        "global_transaction_id_injection": {
            "memcached_key":"myid"
        },
        .......
	
* memcached_port and memcached_port_add_hack directives:
To preserve mysql_fabric support, the memcached server port COULD NOT be set on a per server node basis, so the memcached mysql plugin daemons should be run on the same port for every node of the cluster. Use the memcached_port directive to specify it if not running on standard 11211 memcached port. 
For test and development environment that runs multiple mysql instances on the same server, there is also the horrible memcached_port_add_hack directive, if set, the resulting memcached port, will be the mysql specified port for the node plus the specified value. The following configuration example will land to memcached ports 11211=3306+7905 for node wtf0, 11212=3307+7905 for node wtf1, 11213=3308+7905 for node wtf2 :

```
{
    "wtf-1": {
        "master": {
            "master_0": {
                "host": "wtf0",
                "port": "3306"
            }
        },
        "slave": {
            "slave_0": {
                "host": "wtf1",
                "port": "3307"
            },
            "slave_1": {
                "host": "wtf2",
                "port": "3308"
            }
        },
        "gtid_on_connect": 1,
        "global_transaction_id_injection": {
            "memcached_key":"#SID",
            "memcached_port_add_hack":7905
        },
        "filters": {
            "quality_of_service": {
                "session_consistency": 1
            },
            "random": {
                "sticky": "1"
            }
        }
   }
}
```

---> Set gtid qos option after injection:
With qos session consistency the gtid qos option is automatically set after every master injection, this way there is no need to set it through the mysqlnd_ms_set_qos function, you can simply set the qos filter in json configuration file without any change to php applications.

---> Check last gtid on slave only if needed:
Every time a slave connection is checked for session consistency the last retrieved gtid is saved and checked before any new effective check on the same slave.

---> #SID placeholder:
In  "memcached_key", "on_commit", "fetch_last_gtid" and  "check_for_gtid" directives the php session id can be used through the "#SID" placeholder. This is particularly usefull in async ajax application contexts, where you need to force session consistency through subsequent http requests. 

--> gtid_on_connect directive:
If set and qos session consistency is configured, then, on every new connection, the last gtid is retrived from the master and automatically set as the new gtid qos filter option value. This is particularly usefull in async ajax application contexts, where you need to mantain session consistency through subsequent http requests. 

## MINOR CHANGES

---> master_on INI directive:
By default all query statement that does not start with "SELECT" goes to the master. With the new master_on php INI directive You can specify which query goes to master, i.e.:

mysqlnd_ms.master_on=INSERT,UPDATE,DELETE,LOAD,REPLACE,CREATE,ALTER,DROP,TRUNCATE,RENAME,LOCK,UNLOCK,CALL

Will route all queries that start with one of the listed tokens to the master node.

---> Configuration reload if json configuration file has been changed: Usefull in fast-cgi/php-fpm contexts.

---> mysqlnd_ms_set_trx() and mysqlnd_ms_unset_trx() php functions:
Use it to mark transactions begin for php modules, like PDO:beginTransaction, that does not use the mysqlnd_tx_begin call, i.e.:

```
class MyPDO extends PDO
{
    public function beginTransaction()
    {
	mysqlnd_ms_set_trx($this);
        return parent::beginTransaction();
    }
}
```

---> More SQL Hints:
MYSQLND_MS_STRONG_SWITCH "ms=strong": Switch to qos strong consistency
MYSQLND_MS_SESSION_SWITCH "ms=session": Switch to qos session consistency
MYSQLND_MS_EVENTUAL_SWITCH "ms=eventual": Switch to qos eventual consistency

POSSIBLE FUTURE CHANGES (ANY SUGGESTIONS OR HINTS???)
-----------------------------------------------------

---> Add fabric master slave group initialization. Actually fabric support is focused on shards, but fabric can be used also to initialize master slave groups on extension startup.

---> Port to php7 and add some phpt test automation. 

---> Take a look at statistics counters.

---> Add a new "slave_on" INI directive as an alternative to "master_on" INI directive.

---> Add a new "all_on" INI directive to dispatch query to all nodes on the cluster.
